PSRDEX PROJECT BRIEF FOR REFINEMENT

This document describes the PSRDEX project as currently understood, with enough
scientific and implementation detail to use as a prompt for refining the next
development stage. The goal is not to write code here, but to define the problem
clearly so that the next implementation plan can be made precise.


1. SERVER DATA STORAGE, PULSAR ARCHIVE CONTENT, FILE ORGANIZATION, AND CSV CATALOG GENERATION

1. PSRDEX is being built for a shared remote server used by a pulsar-observing
   team. The scientific data consist of pulsar observation archive files, mainly
   PSRCHIVE-readable files with the extension ".nop".

2. The archive files are stored in a fixed data directory on the server. The
   current default data directory is:
   /QNAP/LOFAR/PL611

3. The data directory is not static. New pulsar observation files are written to
   this location over time. The cadence is irregular: sometimes new files arrive
   weekly, sometimes monthly, depending on the observing schedule and data
   transfer.

4. The archive is already large. The first real server test discovered about
   16,900 matching ".nop" files. This makes a naive script that reprocesses
   every file on every run scientifically and operationally inefficient.

5. The old workflow was a one-shot script that scanned all archive files and
   produced CSV metadata. That was acceptable when the dataset was static, but it
   fails as a long-term strategy for an ever-growing archive because every
   update would repeat work for thousands of unchanged files.

6. PSRDEX therefore uses an incremental metadata pipeline. The command-line tool
   is called:
   psrdex-update

7. The normal command is:
   psrdex-update update

8. The update command scans the archive directory using the configured glob
   pattern. The current default glob is:
   *.nop

9. The update command does not modify the original pulsar archive files. It only
   reads them. This is essential because the archive files are scientific raw or
   processed observation products and must not be changed by the indexing
   dashboard.

10. For each discovered file, PSRDEX records a file fingerprint consisting of
    the file path, file size, and modification time. These fingerprints allow
    PSRDEX to decide whether a file is new, changed, already processed, or
    previously failed.

11. The canonical state store is an SQLite database stored under the PSRDEX
    output directory. The server default output directory is:
    /home/pmarmat/psrdex_catalog

12. The SQLite database path is:
    /home/pmarmat/psrdex_catalog/psrdex.sqlite

13. The SQLite database has a processed-file manifest and an observation table.
    This makes the catalog robust to repeated runs: unchanged files are skipped,
    changed files replace their old metadata, and failed files are recorded.

14. The important output CSV files are exported from SQLite after an update:
    observations.csv: one row per processed observation file.
    pulsar_summary.csv: one summary row per pulsar.
    pulsars/<PSRJ>.csv: one per-pulsar CSV file containing all observations of that pulsar.
    failures.csv: files that could not be processed and their errors.
    background_update.log: logs from Streamlit-triggered background updates.

15. The per-pulsar CSV directory is:
    /home/pmarmat/psrdex_catalog/pulsars/

16. This per-pulsar CSV layout is important for dashboard use. The app can load
    a complete global table when needed, but it can also reason about each pulsar
    as a separate scientific object with its own observation history.

17. PSRDEX extracts metadata using PSRCHIVE command-line tools. The main
    metadata command is "vap". Profile-derived SNR uses the PSRCHIVE Python
    bindings when available and falls back to "pdv" when needed.

18. The current metadata extracted per archive includes, among other fields:
    path, file_name, file_size_bytes, file_mtime_ns, pulsar, datetime_utc, MJD,
    RA, DEC, observing band, center frequency, bandwidth, number of
    subintegrations, number of channels, number of phase bins, number of
    polarizations, time-bin size, subintegration length, total duration, period,
    DM, dedispersion correction flag, SNR, and processing timestamp.

19. The pulsar name is taken from PSRCHIVE metadata when available. If the
    archive metadata does not provide a name, PSRDEX falls back to a filename
    pattern of the form:
    J####+####_YYYY-MM-DD_HH:MM:SS
    or
    J####-####_YYYY-MM-DD_HH:MM:SS

20. The observation time is also inferred carefully. Filename date/time is
    preferred when present, then PSRCHIVE start date/time metadata, then MJD.
    This matters because the dashboard uses observation time as the x-axis for
    per-pulsar monitoring.

21. The scientific frequency-lane convention is part of the catalog and
    dashboard. HBA observations cover approximately 117-189 MHz:
    lane1b: 129 MHz, 117-141 MHz.
    lane2b: 153 MHz, 141-165 MHz.
    lane3b: 177 MHz, 165-189 MHz.
    lane0b: combined bandwidth of lane1b, lane2b, and lane3b.

22. LBA observations cover approximately 44-80 MHz:
    lane1c: 50 MHz, 44-56 MHz.
    lane2c: 62 MHz, 56-68 MHz.
    lane3c: 74 MHz, 68-80 MHz.
    lane0c: combined bandwidth of lane1c, lane2c, and lane3c.

23. The lane label is inferred from center frequency and bandwidth. This lets
    users compare observations in scientifically meaningful frequency ranges,
    instead of treating frequency as an arbitrary numeric column.

24. PSRDEX currently computes SNR from the integrated pulse profile rather than
    trusting the archive header SNR. The algorithm is:
    divide the integrated flux-versus-phase profile into 10 equal phase segments;
    compute the mean power in each segment;
    treat the segment with the lowest mean power as the off-pulse region;
    compute the off-pulse mean mu_off and standard deviation sigma_off;
    take I_max as the maximum profile intensity over the full pulse profile;
    compute SNR as (I_max - mu_off) / sigma_off.

25. This SNR definition is important because it gives a consistent measurement
    across archives and is directly tied to the observed pulse profile. It is a
    simple first-pass detection-quality metric for dashboard visualization.

26. The first full update is expected to be slow because every existing archive
    must be read. Later updates should be much faster because only new or
    changed files are processed.

27. The update command supports useful modes:
    psrdex-update update: process new or changed files.
    psrdex-update update --dry-run: report pending files without processing.
    psrdex-update update --workers N: control parallel workers.
    psrdex-update update --retry-failures: retry unchanged files that failed.
    psrdex-update update --force: reprocess every discovered file.
    psrdex-update export: re-export CSVs from SQLite.
    psrdex-update status: print manifest and observation counts.

28. The "--force" option is scientifically useful when the extraction algorithm
    changes, for example when the profile-derived SNR calculation was added.
    However, it should be used carefully because it reprocesses all ~16,000+
    files.

29. The update command can be run manually, through a weekly systemd timer, or
    as a background task launched by the Streamlit app. The Streamlit-triggered
    update is non-blocking so the dashboard can immediately show whatever CSV
    data already exists.

30. The dashboard should never wait for a full archive scan before becoming
    useful. Its scientific role is to expose the best currently indexed view of
    the archive while the background update improves completeness.


2. DESIRED DASHBOARD FUNCTIONALITY AND CURRENT DESIGN STATUS

1. The dashboard is intended to be a "Pokedex for pulsars": a browser that lets
   a researcher quickly ask, for any pulsar in the local archive, what data
   exist, in which observing bands, across which epochs, with what SNR and
   metadata, and how that pulsar sits in the broader pulsar population.

2. The dashboard is a Streamlit web app intended to run on the remote server.
   Users connected to the same LAN can open the dashboard in a browser using the
   server address and Streamlit port.

3. The dashboard reads CSV files produced by psrdex-update. It does not read or
   modify archive files directly during ordinary browsing.

4. The top of the dashboard should show:
   Title: PSRDEX.
   Subtitle: Indexing tool for pulsars.
   Last updated: timestamp derived from the catalog processing time or CSV file modification time.

5. The dashboard currently has a scientific overview layout rather than a
   marketing-style landing page. The first screen is meant to be immediately
   useful for data inspection.

6. The dashboard currently displays metric cards summarizing the local catalog:
   number of pulsars, number of indexed files, total observing hours, number of
   frequency bands/lanes, and number of ATNF matches used for P-Pdot context.

7. The dashboard uses psrqpy to query the ATNF pulsar catalog. The ATNF metadata
   are used for scientific context, especially period P, period derivative Pdot,
   DM, distance, age, and spin-down energy when available.

8. The P-Pdot diagram is a key population-context plot. It places the locally
   observed pulsars onto the standard pulsar period-period derivative plane when
   ATNF P and Pdot are available. This helps users understand whether their local
   archive contains ordinary pulsars, recycled pulsars, young energetic pulsars,
   or unusual systems.

9. The dashboard also shows a 3D equatorial-sky plot using Plotly. The points
   represent pulsar positions on a celestial sphere using RA and DEC. This helps
   users understand sky coverage and source distribution.

10. The sky plot currently uses a grey-tinted sphere, grid/boundary lines, and
    visible axes so that the geometry is easier to see against the page
    background.

11. The sky positions are currently derived from local catalog RA/DEC values.
    ATNF is still required for the P-Pdot diagram and source metadata, but the
    local archive coordinates are used for sky placement when available.

12. The main dashboard has two top-level plots side by side:
    left: P-Pdot diagram;
    right: 3D equatorial celestial sphere.

13. Below the overview plots, the dashboard has a pulsar selector. The user can
    choose a specific pulsar from a dropdown menu.

14. Once a pulsar is selected, the dashboard shows all observations for that
    pulsar as a time-series scatter plot. The x-axis is observation time and the
    y-axis is total SNR from the PSRDEX profile-derived SNR column.

15. The observation scatter plot is scientifically useful because it reveals
    whether the pulsar has many epochs, whether the SNR changes over time, and
    whether some frequency lanes are systematically stronger or weaker.

16. Frequency lanes are now controlled using checkboxes below the observation
    plot, rather than relying on Plotly's click-on-legend behavior. This is more
    explicit and more suitable for scientific filtering.

17. The lane checkboxes correspond to the local LOFAR-style HBA/LBA lane
    definitions. Toggling lanes changes which observations are plotted.

18. Beneath the lane checkboxes, the dashboard shows a lane summary table. The
    current intention is that this table reports, for each selected lane:
    lane label, receiver type, number of files, total hours, maximum SNR, and
    latest observation date.

19. When the user clicks an observation point in the scatter plot, the dashboard
    should update a metadata table at the bottom of the page. The table should
    show the selected file name, SNR, DM, period, MJD, UTC datetime, RA, DEC,
    frequency, bandwidth, duration, archive path, and relevant ATNF metadata.

20. The dashboard should not depend on hover boxes for scientific details.
    Hover boxes are temporary and easy to miss. The selected observation should
    have persistent details in a proper Streamlit element/table.

21. The current design has intentionally muted colors. The page background was
    dimmed from the default bright white. Plot backgrounds were adjusted to
    match the page palette while preserving axis/grid visibility.

22. Input fields such as dropdowns should have strong color contrast. The text
    inside them must remain readable against the field background.

23. The table colors should match the rest of the page. The current metadata
    table is intended to use a controlled HTML/CSS style so it does not look like
    a default bright-white dataframe pasted onto a muted scientific dashboard.

24. The sidebar is currently not important and can remain empty until there are
    real global controls to place there.

25. The dashboard had an earlier bug where coordinate arrays/lists were printed
    under the PSRDEX title. The root cause was a bare expression inside the
    angle parsing function. That was fixed by turning validation into a normal
    loop with no Streamlit-visible expression.

26. The dashboard had Streamlit deprecation warnings for use_container_width.
    The current direction is to use width="stretch" instead.

27. The app must suppress useless debug output from ATNF/coordinate conversion
    in the Streamlit frontend. ATNF queries are required, but their internal
    representation should never be printed into the app.

28. The dashboard currently prioritizes scientific usability:
    clear title and update timestamp;
    immediate catalog-level context;
    population and sky-location plots;
    source-level observation timeline;
    lane filtering;
    persistent selected-observation metadata.

29. The next design stage should preserve scientific accuracy and visibility.
    The goal is not decorative polish alone; every UI element should help users
    answer a scientific archive question faster.

30. Future desired dashboard functions include:
    selection of one or more observation files for deeper analysis;
    displaying plots generated by external analysis tools;
    showing logs and output products from server-side jobs;
    comparing multiple epochs for the same pulsar;
    making it clear which products come from PSRDEX metadata and which come from
    deeper PSRISM analysis.


3. PSRISM USAGE AND THE SPECIFIC FUTURE INTEGRATION GOAL FOR PSRDEX

1. There is already a Python command-line package named PSRISM on this machine
   at:
   /home/piyushmarmat/PhD/PSRISM/psrism/

2. PSRISM is a command-line Python package for pulsar interstellar-medium
   analysis from PSRCHIVE-readable archive files. It uses PSRCHIVE for archive
   I/O and scientific Python tools for analysis, fitting, and plotting.

3. Scientifically, PSRISM takes a pulsar archive and produces deeper propagation
   and profile-analysis products than PSRDEX currently computes. These include:
   dynamic spectra, autocorrelation spectra, secondary spectra, integrated pulse
   profiles, scattering timescale tau, scattering spectral index alpha,
   scintillation bandwidths, scintillation timescales, refractive scintillation
   estimates, anisotropic pulse-broadening fits, and time-series plots.

4. PSRISM can be installed in editable mode from its package directory using
   pip, and the basic command-line interface is:
   psrism --help

5. The simplest single-archive usage is:
   psrism ARCHIVE
   With only an archive specified, PSRISM loads the archive, reports metadata,
   applies its default preprocessing, and does not make plots unless plotting or
   fitting flags are requested.

6. The basic preprocessing includes loading with psrchive.Archive_load,
   dedispersion, polarization scrunching, and optional user-specified choices
   for --dm, --nsub, --nchan, and --nbin.

7. PSRISM has an inspect mode:
   psrism ARCHIVE --inspect
   This reports valid scrunching targets for --nsub, --nchan, and --nbin. This
   is important because PSRCHIVE scrunch targets must divide the current archive
   dimensions exactly.

8. PSRISM dynamic-spectrum mode is:
   psrism ARCHIVE --dspec
   This creates a dynamic spectrum showing pulse intensity versus observing time
   and radio frequency. It is the primary data product for scintillation
   analysis.

9. PSRISM autocorrelation-spectrum mode is:
   psrism ARCHIVE --acspec
   This computes the autocorrelation of the dynamic spectrum and estimates
   decorrelation bandwidth and diffractive scintillation timescale.

10. A zoomed ACF view can be requested with:
    psrism ARCHIVE --acspec --zoom-acf

11. PSRISM secondary-spectrum mode is:
    psrism ARCHIVE --sspec
    This computes the squared magnitude of the two-dimensional Fourier transform
    of the mean-subtracted dynamic spectrum.

12. Secondary-spectrum parabolic-arc fitting can be requested with:
    psrism ARCHIVE --sspec --fit-arc
    This searches for and overlays scintillation arc curvature.

13. PSRISM integrated-profile mode is:
    psrism ARCHIVE --intpf
    This plots the integrated pulse profile and fits a scatter-broadened pulse
    model.

14. A scattering-timescale fit can also be requested with:
    psrism ARCHIVE --fit-tau

15. Frequency scaling of scattering can be measured with:
    psrism ARCHIVE --fit-alpha --tau-subbands 4
    This divides the bandwidth into subbands, fits tau in each subband, and fits
    tau(nu) proportional to nu^alpha.

16. An optional reference frequency can be supplied:
    psrism ARCHIVE --fit-alpha --tau-subbands 4 --tau-reference-freq 150

17. PSRISM has an anisotropic pulse-broadening mode:
    psrism ARCHIVE --fit-anisotropy --tau-subbands 4
    This fits anisotropic broadening parameters tau_x, tau_y, tau_eff, and a
    tau_ratio diagnostic.

18. PSRISM can estimate refractive quantities from tau with:
    psrism ARCHIVE --estimate-refractive --tau-subbands 4
    If distance and transverse velocity are supplied, it can estimate
    diffractive timescale, refractive timescale, number of scintles, and
    finite-scintle uncertainty.

19. A more complete refractive estimate can be requested with:
    psrism ARCHIVE --estimate-refractive --tau-subbands 4 --distance-kpc 1.0 --velocity-kms 100

20. PSRISM can also run on a directory instead of a single archive. In this
    mode, it treats the directory as a chronological set of archives for one
    pulsar and makes parameter-versus-time products.

21. Directory time-series usage looks like:
    psrism /path/to/pulsar_directory --time-params all --nsub 70 --nchan 61 --nbin 256 --tau-subbands 4

22. The supported time-series parameter names are:
    dm: dispersion measure from archive metadata.
    tau: integrated-profile scattering timescale.
    alpha: scattering spectral index from subband tau fits.
    dnu_d: ACF decorrelation bandwidth.
    dt_d: ACF diffractive scintillation timescale.
    t_r: refractive scintillation timescale inferred from ACF quantities.
    all: all of the above.

23. Directory mode can be restricted with --time-pattern, for example to analyze
    only selected epochs or selected archive names from a directory.

24. PSRISM writes outputs into a folder named after the pulsar in the current
    working directory. For single-archive runs, outputs include a terminal log
    and plot files such as:
    *_dspec.png
    *_acspec.png
    *_acspec_zoom.png
    *_sspec.png
    *_intpf.png
    *_tau_fit.png
    *_tau_vs_freq.png
    *_subband_tau_fits.png
    *_anisotropic_tau_eff_vs_freq.png

25. For directory time-series runs, PSRISM writes products such as:
    *_time_series_terminal_output.txt
    *_time_series.csv
    *_time_series_dm_vs_time.png
    *_time_series_tau_vs_time.png
    and related plots for requested parameters.

26. The future PSRDEX goal is to connect the dashboard to PSRISM safely and
    usefully. When a user selects a pulsar in PSRDEX, they should be able to
    select one observation file, or multiple epochs/files, and launch a PSRISM
    analysis from the dashboard.

27. For a single selected observation, PSRDEX should run PSRISM on the selected
    archive path with user-chosen analysis flags. For example, the user may want
    dynamic spectrum, ACF, secondary spectrum, integrated profile, tau fit,
    alpha fit, anisotropic fit, or refractive estimates.

28. For multiple selected observations of the same pulsar, PSRDEX should support
    a multi-epoch analysis. This could use PSRISM directory time-series mode, or
    a PSRDEX-created temporary working directory containing symlinks to exactly
    the selected archive files, so that PSRISM analyzes only those epochs.

29. PSRDEX should not modify original archive files while launching PSRISM. All
    PSRISM output products should be written to a dedicated analysis-output
    directory, for example under:
    /home/pmarmat/psrdex_catalog/psrism_runs/

30. Each PSRISM run should have a unique run directory containing:
    selected input archive paths;
    command-line options used;
    terminal output log;
    generated PNG plots;
    generated CSV files;
    run status such as queued/running/succeeded/failed;
    start and end timestamps.

31. The Streamlit dashboard should expose this as a controlled job workflow,
    not as arbitrary shell access. The UI should let users choose from safe,
    whitelisted PSRISM options rather than typing unrestricted commands.

32. The dashboard should show job progress and the PSRISM terminal log, because
    PSRISM prints scientifically important quantities such as tau, alpha,
    decorrelation bandwidth, diffractive timescale, arc curvature, fit quality,
    and warnings.

33. After a PSRISM run finishes, PSRDEX should discover the generated output
    files and display them in proper Streamlit elements:
    images for PNG plots;
    dataframes for CSV time-series tables;
    text/log panels for terminal-output summaries.

34. The selected-observation metadata table in PSRDEX should be linked to the
    analysis action. A user should be able to click a point in the observation
    SNR timeline, inspect its metadata, then launch PSRISM for that exact file.

35. For multi-epoch analysis, the user should be able to select multiple points
    or rows for a single pulsar, then run PSRISM time-series analysis across
    those selected epochs.

36. The dashboard should clearly separate the two analysis levels:
    PSRDEX metadata indexing: fast, incremental, always available from CSVs.
    PSRISM physical analysis: slower, user-triggered, archive-level or
    multi-epoch, producing plots and fitted propagation parameters.

37. The final desired workflow is:
    open PSRDEX in the browser;
    choose a pulsar;
    inspect archive coverage, bands, hours, SNR, and ATNF metadata;
    choose one observation or multiple epochs;
    choose PSRISM products to generate;
    launch the server-side PSRISM job;
    monitor logs/status in the dashboard;
    view generated plots and tables in the dashboard;
    compare results across epochs when multiple archives are selected.

38. This integration would make PSRDEX not only an archive index, but also a
    launchpad for reproducible pulsar interstellar-medium analysis.
